README.md, before:

# concurrent-phasers

This package is a Haskell implementation of the "Phaser," a barrier-like 
synchronization object. Its construction and behavior is inspired
by the object of the same name that is part of the 
[Habanero Project](https://habanero.rice.edu).

# What's a Phaser?

The `Phaser` is basically a generalized [barrier](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Barrier_(computer_science)).
It differs in a few respects:

1. A `Phaser` is re-usable, and can block as many times as is needed.

2. A `Phaser` has a notion of some phase (for this package, any `Enum`), which is advanced every time all 
parties/threads leave the `Phaser`.

3. In a barrier, all parties that arrive on the barrier block until all remaining parties arrive. 
In `Phaser` terms, these threads both `Signal` (their arrival is necessary for the barrier to advance) and `Wait` (block until the barrier does advance). However, with a `Phaser`, a thread can use the `Phaser` in a `Signal`-ling
capacity, a `Wait`ing capacity, or both (`SignalWait`). This means you can have threads which contribute towards unblocking
others, even if they are not blocked by the phaser... or threads that do not contribute towards unblocking
the phaser, but will still be blocked by it.

# Usage

## Modules

This package includes both an `MVar`-based implementation (`IOPhaser`) and a `STM`-based implementation (`STMPhaser`). The `IOPhaser` is used by default when you import `Control.Concurrent.Phaser`, but `Control.Concurrent.Phaser.STM` has the alternate `STMPhaser` option.

## Using a Phaser

### Creation

A `Phaser` is declared with a 'phase' and initial number of threads/parties that will use it:
```haskell
ph <- newIOPhaser 0 4 -- Starting with phase 0, 4 parties.
```

The number of parties can be dynamically adjusted with the `register` and `unregister` functions.

### Synchronization

Synchronizing work on a `Phaser` is fairly straightforward -- in each thread, state which phasers
you want to synchronize with, what your relationship (Signal/Wait) is with them, and what you want to do:

```haskell
-- Single phaser, Signal/Wait mode:

runPhased ph SignalWait $ do
  ... something useful ...

-- Or even with multiple Phasers
runMultiPhased [(ph1, Signal), (ph2, Wait)] $ do
  ... something useful...
```

Any barrier-like blocking occurs _after_ the the action specified on the phaser has been run.

# vs. Java Phasers

The `Phaser` type is semantically different from, but not entirely unlike, Java's
[java.util.concurrent.Phaser](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/util/concurrent/Phaser.html) class.


# Future Features

Some features which are currently unimplemented, but may eventually be added:

* Asynchronous exception safety

* Tree-structuring of Phasers to eliminate livelock for large numbers of
processes

Commit message:

Update README with Conway's Game of Life test info

README.md, after:

# concurrent-phasers (a work in progress)

This package is a Haskell implementation of the "Phaser," a barrier-like 
synchronization object. Its construction and behavior is inspired
by the object of the same name that is part of the 
[Habanero Project](https://habanero.rice.edu).

# Tests

The test suite assumes that you have `haskell-stack` installed on your system.
To start it, run:
```
make test # 'stack test' works too
```

Currently, there are two sets of tests -- one ([`PhaserSpec`](test/Control/Concurrent/PhaserSpec.hs)) 
is a test of basic properties of the `Phaser`s. The other, 
(([`ConwaySpec`](test/Control/Concurrent/ConwaySpec.hs)) is a stress-test that is designed to 
coax misbehavior or hard-to-find race conditions from the `Phaser`s by computing a certain 
generation of a game of Conway's Game of Life in parallel.

# What's a Phaser?

The `Phaser` is basically a generalized [barrier](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Barrier_(computer_science)).
It differs in a few respects:

1. A `Phaser` is re-usable, whereas a barrier is usually used only once.

2. A `Phaser` has a notion of some phase (for this package, any `Enum`), which is advanced every time all 
parties/threads leave the `Phaser`.

3. In a barrier, all parties that arrive on the barrier block until all remaining parties arrive. 
In `Phaser` terms, these threads both `Signal` (their arrival is necessary for the barrier to advance) and `Wait` (block until the barrier does advance). However, unlike a barrier, with a `Phaser`, a thread can use the `Phaser` in a `Signal`-ling
capacity, a `Wait`ing capacity, or both (`SignalWait`). This means you can have threads which contribute towards unblocking
others, even if they are not blocked by the phaser... or threads that do not contribute towards unblocking
the phaser, but will still be blocked by it.

# Usage

(If you'd prefer to see an example, you might want to check out the Conway's Game of Life
[example](test/Control/Concurrent/ConwaySpec.hs) that's used as a stress test in the test suite.)

## Modules

This package includes both an `MVar`-based implementation (`IOPhaser`) and a `STM`-based implementation (`STMPhaser`). The `IOPhaser` is used by default when you import `Control.Concurrent.Phaser`, but `Control.Concurrent.Phaser.STM` has the alternate `STMPhaser` option.

## Using a Phaser

### Creation

A `Phaser` is declared with a 'phase' and initial number of threads/parties that will use it:
```haskell
ph <- newIOPhaser 0 4 -- Starting with phase 0, 4 parties.
```

The number of parties can be dynamically adjusted with the `register` and `unregister` functions.

### Synchronization

Synchronizing work on a `Phaser` is fairly straightforward -- in each thread, state which phasers
you want to synchronize with, what your relationship (Signal/Wait) is with them, and what you want to do:

```haskell
-- Single phaser, Signal/Wait mode:

runPhased ph SignalWait $ do
  ... something useful, blocks when done on ph until all signalling parties arrive ...

-- Or even with multiple Phasers
runMultiPhased [(ph1, Signal), (ph2, Wait)] $ do
  ... something useful, blocks when done on ph2 until all signalling parties arrive ...
```

It's important to note that any barrier-like blocking occurs _after_ the the action specified on the phaser has been run.

# vs. Java Phasers

The `Phaser` type is semantically different from, but not entirely unlike, Java's
[java.util.concurrent.Phaser](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/util/concurrent/Phaser.html) class.


# Future Features

Some features which are currently unimplemented, but may eventually be added:

* Asynchronous exception safety

* Tree-structuring of Phasers to eliminate livelock for large numbers of
processes
